# OOP Complexity

## Examples of complex systems

- Structure of a Personal Computer
- Structure of Plants and Animals
- Structure of Matter
- Structure of Social Institutions

## Software is Inherently Complex

The complexity of software is an essential property, not an accidental one.

That complexity derives from four elements:

1. The complexity of the problem domain.
2. The complexity of managing the development process.
3. The flexibility possible through software.
4. The problems of characterizing the behaviour of discrete systems.

### The complexity of the Problem Domain

1. Myriad of competing, contradictory requirements.
2. Communication gap between the users of a system and its developers.
3. Users can't give precise expressions of their needs.
4. All involved lack expertise in the domain.
5. Requirements hard to interpret and to understand.
6. Requirements change over time.

### The Difficulty of Managing the Development Process

1. The size of project sometime super big.
2. One person can't understand the whole system.
3. More people in the team and more teams -> more complex communication, interactions, coordination.
4. With the team key management challenge is always to maintain a unity and integrity of the design.

### The Flexibility Possible through Software

1. Software offers the ultimate flexibility, so it is possible for developer to express almost any kind of abstraction.
2. This flexibility turns out to be an incredibly seductive property, however, because it also forces the developer to craft virtually all the primitive building blocks on which these higher-level abstractions stand.

### The Problems of Characterizing the Behavior of Discrete Systems

1. Real apps have huge state. (variables, current values, current address, calling stack)
2. Real apps have more than one thread of control.
3. Chances that developers haven't thought about some of states is very high. As each external even can lead to transition of undesired state.

## The Five Attributes of a Complex System

1. Hierarchic Structure. 

All systems have subsystems and all systems are parts of larger systems. The value added by a system must come from the relationships between the parts, not from the parts per system.

2. Relative Primitives

The choice of what components in a system are primitive is relatively arbitrary and is largely up to the discretion of the observer of the system.

3. Separation of Concerns

Intracomponent linkages are generally stronger than intercomponent linkages. This fact has the effect of separating the high-frequency dynamics of the components - involving the internal structure of the components - from the low frequency dynamics - involving interaction among components.

4. Common Patterns

Hierarchic systems are usually composed of only a few different kinds of sub systems in various combinations and arrangements.

5. Stable Intermediate Forms

Complex systems tend to evolve over time. As system evolve, objects that were once considered complex become the primitive object on which more complex systems are built.
We can never craft these primitive objects correctly the first time. We must to use them in context first and then improve them over time.

## Organized and Disorganized Complexity

Common abstractions and mechanisms greatly facilitates out understanding of complex systems.

Example: pilot can use different planes.

### The canonical form of a Complex System

Most systems have more than one hierarchy. 

Example: aircraft may be studied by decomposing it into its propulsion system, flight-control system, and so on. (PART OF)

Alternately, turbofun engine is a specific kind of jet engine. And Pratt and Whitney TF30 is a specific kind of turbofan engine. Jet engine represents generalization of the properties common to every kind of jet engine.
(IS A)

Architecture - class structure and the object structure of the system.

Class structure - IS A.
Object structure - PART OF.

Most successful complex software systems are those whose designs explicitly encompass well-engineered class and object structures and embody the five attributes of complex systems.

### Limitations of the Human Capacity for Dealing with Complexity

As we begin to analyze a complex software system, we find many parts that must interact in a multitude of intricate ways, with little perceptible commonality among either the parts or their interactions; this is an example of disorganized complexity.

It is absolutely impossible for a single person to keep track of all of these details at once. 

Max number of chunks of info that an individual can simultaneously comprehend is on the order of seven +- two. Related to short term memory.

Processing speed is a limiting factor: it takes the mind about five seconds to accept a new chunk of information.

## Bringing Order to Chaos

The technique of mastering complexity has been known since ancient times:
divide and rule.

When designing a complex system, it is essential to decompose it into smaller and smaller parts, each of which we may then refine independently. 

*Algorithmic Decomposition* - Decomposition of problem into set of small steps.

*Object-Oriented Decomposition* - Decomposition according to the key abstractions in the problem domain. Key abstractions play as autonomous agents, that collaborate to perform some higher-level behaviour.

*Abstraction* - How to deal with complexity? Abstract from it. Unable to master entirety of a complex object, choose to ignore its inessential details, dealing instead with generalized, idealized model of the object.

## On Designing Complex Systems

The programming challenge is a large-scale exercise in applied abstraction and thus requires the abilities of the former mathematician blended with the attitude of the competent engineer.


### The Meaning of Design

Design - a path from requirements to implementation, such that:

* Satisfies a given functional specification
* Conforms to limitations of the target medium
* Meets implicit or explicit requirements on performance and resource usage
* Satisfies implicit or explicit design criteria on the form of the artefact
* Satisfies restrictions on the design process itself, such as its length or cost, or the tools available for doing the design.

## Summary

* Software is inherently complex; the complexity of software systems often exceeds the human intellectual capacity.
* The task of the software development team is to engineer the illusion of simplicity.
* Complexity often takes the form of a hierarchy; it is useful to model both the "is a" and the "part of" hierarchies of a complex system.
* Complex systems generally evolve from stable intermediate forms.
* There are fundamental limiting factors of human cognition; we can address these constraints though the use of decomposition, abstraction, and hierarchy.
* Complex systems can be viewed by focusing on either things or processes; there are compelling reasons for applying ood in which we view the world as a meaningful collection of objects that collaborate to achieve some higher-level behaviour.
* Object-oriented analysis and design is the method that leads us to an object-oriented decomposition; oo design uses notation and process for constructing complex software systems and offers a rich set of models with which we may reason about different aspects of the system under consideration.
